Who among you does not remember or understand
your dreams, but would like to?
If you said, "I would,"
you're going to love this interview.
Robert Moss has spent a lifetime
researching, experiencing, and teaching about dream time.
One of his most popular books, Dream Gates,
gives detailed information about the nature
of our night time dreams,
while his newest book, Active Dreaming:
Journeying Beyond Limitation to a Life of Wild Freedom,
speaks to both dreaming and daydreaming,
or active dreaming.
In our interview we spoke of both,
as he shared profound wisdoms regarding
our internal dreamscape.
Robert, I noticed in your book,
one of the things you said fairly early on
was that you don't really like the term lucid dreaming.
And there's a reason for it and you have a prefered way
of speaking of dreamtime.
Well for a while lucid dreaming was discussed
in American culture as if it's essentially about
waking up to the fact that you're dreaming
during a sleep dream.
And then taking control and trying to manipulate
the content of the dream.
Well, first of all, you know we can become lucid dreamers
while wide awake and conscious.
We don't have to do it only during sleep dreams.
We can learn to go consciously, or lucidly,
from a waking state into the dream state,
and stay there.
That's really interesting,
it might be the most easy way of being a lucid dreamer.
Oh good, we'll talk about that
as soon as you're done with this.
Absolutely.
And secondly, we don't want to control or manipulate
our dreams.
We want to exercise conscious choice, yes,
we want to navigate,
but to say that we want to control or manipulate
the dreamworld is like saying
we want to control or manipulate the ocean.
You can't do it.
I mean, it's ridiculous.
It's bigger than you are.
So what you want to do is learn consciously
to navigate, have more fun, make choice,
but not try and manipulate.
I like what you were just talking about
about having a lucid dream prior to going into sleep time.
And then continuing from there.
Talk about that a little bit,
that's a new concept for most people.
Well, there's this hypnagogic state, you know,
it's the liminal stage, you're not asleep,
you're not awake,
you're floating, you're drifting in between.
It's a very creative state.
We want to learn to spend more time
in that in between state.
When you look at the history of creativity,
scientific discovery, literary breakthroughs,
musical inspiration,
lots of people have produced lots of interesting results
in this liminal state of consciousness.
If you can learn to sustain your lucidity,
your consciousness, in this in between state
between sleep and waking,
you can embark on lucid, or conscious dream adventures
any night you like.
It's great fun.
A good time to do it is first thing in the morning
when you don't have to get out and run off to work
right away,
when a dream is with you perhaps
and you can go on with the dream.
And that's a royal road to conscious or lucid dreaming,
by the way.
You have a dream memory,
it's like a doorway in your mind,
you've been somewhere in your dream,
you can learn to go through that doorway again consciously,
have an adventure, talk to someone in the dream space,
go beyond the dream you remember to a deeper reality,
learn to use a personal dream image as a portal
to the multi-dimensional universe.
And this is great, great fun.
Yes, and when you're in that
hypnagogic state, that in between state you speak of,
I've noticed that this is the place,
and you write about it in your book,
where oftentimes you may hear conversations
with other people, you may see people
that are in a halfway, almost an etheric state,
you may see cartoons, you may see anything going on
but this isn't the imagination just
burning off random chemicals.
No.
This is a portal area.
I mean, they hypnagogic state, the in between state,
you're on the threshold between the worlds.
It's a state when you're psychically receptive,
So you'll become aware of what's going on psychically
in your field.
You'll be aware of people or presences
that might be around that ordinarily you wouldn't hear from.
It's a time when messages come through in that way,
from that world.
And it's a time when you're often given a menu
or smorgasbord of possibilities
for active or conscious dreaming,
you see a parade of faces.
You find yourself drifting in different urban areas
or different landscapes.
You can home in on one of them, make that you focus,
and travel with it.
And you'll receive interesting visitations.
Some of my biggest personal adventures
have come in this state,
when, for example, a certain bird will turn up
and lend me its wings to go on a journey.
It might be the sea eagle which I knew as a boy in Australia
It might be the red-tailed hawk,
which I know very well in North America.
I'll feel the brush of feathers sometimes,
beating against my arm,
and realize that a bird is there,
a bird ally to give me the power of flight
to go somewhere really interesting and have an adventure.
And I find this just a fascinating topic,
this in between state.
Because I think first to understand the in between state
you just spoke of as a portal,
I think might be a good time to explain
the state beyond the in between state.
Where do we go?
What are we doing?
We get out there.
You know, when you look at the very word
for dream in many cultures, in many indigenous cultures,
you'll find that it provides a clue.
For example, among the Makirature,
a shamanic dreaming people of South America,
the word for dream is Atakato,
it means a flight of the soul, a journey of the soul.
The understanding of ancestral and indigenous traditions
is that when we go dreaming we get out there.
We travel beyond the brain.
We travel beyond the laws of Newtonian physics.
We travel across time.
We may travel to the dream time of aboriginal belief.
Which, aboriginals in Australia call the All At Once,
the All At Once.
You're outside time,
you're in a spacious now-time,
where wise teachers are available,
where you can be present at the origin of events
and situations that will manifest in waking life.
So we're talking about multi-dimensional reality.
We're talking about non-local mind.
And I would say that dreams and dreaming
are the royal road to get yourself there
and become a citizen of the multiverse.
Yes.
Yes, I would absolutely agree with that.
And qualitatively, there is a time
in the sleep cycle when,
what, the brain is refreshing itself,
where perhaps you can have some neural firing going on
and maybe some of the things that either
you don't have access to or don't make a lot of sense.
But for the most part when you're dreaming
and traveling into this other dimensional reality
we can be, what?
We can be practicing.
We can be meeting with others, as you say.
What is the full spectrum of what we're doing
that you have reflected back to you through your conferences
Well there are four reasons why traditional cultures
have regarded dreaming as essential,
absolutely essential.
And I find that these reasons are valid
and they come into focus every time I lead a program
or discuss dreams with someone who's awake to their dreams.
First of all, in dreams we see the future.
We actually visit the future.
Dreams can be memories of the future.
The dream self has gone ahead of the waking self
and returned with some glimpses of what might lie ahead.
You don't like it?
Okay, try and change the future.
Because you've been on a possible path
into a possible future.
You might be able to revise the future event
if you don't like it if you work with the information.
So this is the first thing about dreaming.
We travel into the future.
We return with memories of what the future might hold,
and if we don't like it then we can change the future
for the better.
That is huge.
That's huge.
Western psychology rarely recognizes this
or talks about it,
but it's a fundamental reason for dreaming
for most ancient and indigenous peoples.
Secondly, dreaming is medicine.
You know what, the body knows what's going on inside it.
And one of the ways it tries to speak to us
is through dreams.
So you can read dreams by looking at the landscapes
and conflicts inside the dream,
as scenes from inside the body.
This is not new, this is not a new approach.
Galen, the second most famous physician of the
Ancient Greek world after Hypocrates,
wrote a treaties on diagnosis through dreams,
in which he described, very specifically,
how you want to look at dreams and messages
from the soul or from consciousness
travelling inside the body during the night
on what the body is going through.
And secondly, in terms of dreaming as medicine,
when we get sick, dreams give us images
that can help us to heal.
It's increasingly recognized in medical science
that imagery can be a powerful source of healing.
Where do we get the right images for our bodies?
Dreams will give them to us.
Thirdly, in terms of traditional understanding
of why dreaming matters,
dreaming puts us in touch with a God/Goddess we can talk to.
It puts us in touch with wiser sources than the waking mind.
It puts us in touch with the high self, or greater self,
it puts us in touch with the ancestors
and our authentic spiritual teachers.
Jung said in his last long essay, quote,
"It is an age-old fact that God talks chiefly
through dreams and visions."
He was quite correct.
Whether we speak of God, Goddess,
or the wise source, or the pleroma,
or the higher self,
that larger self is available to us in dreams
and we want to be in touch with that larger source.
And finally, you know, this is all about soul.
Dreaming is all about soul.
One of the things I learned quarter of a century ago,
when I started dreaming of an ancient native woman
who insisted on speaking her own language,
which I had to study in order to understand her.
An archaic form of the Mohawk Indian language.
When I started talking to her 25 years ago,
she taught me something her culture knows.
That dreaming is about soul,
dreams show us what the soul wants,
dreams show us where our soul energy has gone,
and the job of decent people in a community
is to gather round the dream,
or listen to the dream,
and help them notice what the soul is saying
in the dream and act to honor what the sould wants.
That might include remembering and living
our largest story.
Yes.
Now we could go a thousand directions
and I'll have to hone it down to just a few hundred
because we don't have forever.
This is such a fascinating subject,
when you just talked about being within community
and having this elder, or this wise person
at the center of this, guiding this,
you talk also about conscious dreaming
and bringing together groups of dreamers
like book clubs to examine dreams together.
Which I find fascinating.
I actually attempted to do that a few years ago.
It kind of went over morning coffee, right?
But you start seeing this incredible portrait emerge
of similar dreams people are having.
And that's another collective dreaming,
is an an area that's fascinating.
So let's talk about A, recalling our dreams,
how we can assist each other in that through
sharing dreams and collective dreams.
Well these are very important themes
and many of us are undergoing a dream draught
in our culture.
I mean, our society hasn't rewarded us
for remembering dreams.
It hasn't given us a way of sharing them that's effective.
That's changing.
I've invented a way of sharing dreams,
it's really interesting, it's high energy, it's fun,
and provides strong motivation for remembering dreams
and having a story to bring to the circle.
If you're going through a dream draught
relax, do this, give yourself a juicy intention
any night you want to start tapping into your dreams.
Make it fun.
"I want to meet my dream lover."
"I want to go to Paris and not pay for the plane ticket."
Don't make it another chore.
When you wake up you're going to laze in bed,
see if you've got something.
You don't have anything, spend a bit more time
and roll around in bed.
Sometimes adjusting to the posture your body was in
during the dream brings it back.
You have nothing, fine.
Write something down anyway.
When you write something down anyway
what you're thinking or feeling,
you're saying to your dream producers,
"I am present. I am here. Talk to me."
That might encourage them.
And remember that dreaming is not just about sleep.
The world around us, through signs and synchronicities
and pop-out symbols is speaking to us
in the manner of dreams if we pay attention.
And by learning to pay more attention
to coincidences and symbols in everyday life,
we get into the mode of thinking,
the mode of operating, that encourages
our dreams to come through in the night as well.
We need to do something with our dreams.
If we don't do something with our dreams
we do not dream well and we do not dream so profusely.
Having a method by which you can talk to a friend
or a small group about your dreams,
will mobilize you to gather more material
whether it's from the night or the day.
I've developed a process I call the
Lightening Dreamwork Process,
because it's meant to be quick,
like a lightening bolt,
and it's meant to focus energy, woosh,
like that.
And it's got four steps, you can do it in a few minutes.
This doesn't exhaust what you're going to do
with an interesting dream,
you might work on an interesting dream
or play with it for a very long time.
But it gives you something to do
that you can do with just about anyone,
just about anywhere,
that suits our western hurry sickness.
The four steps are these.
You get the dreamer to tell the dream as a story,
simply and clearly, and you give undivided attention.
That's big.
You're encouraging each other to claim your voice,
tell your story, claim your ground.
That is huge.
Become a storyteller.
Secondly, the partner listening to the dreamer
asks a few basic questions.
The first one is always, "What are your feelings
"around the dream?"
And this is critical.
This is critical.
It's not your analysis,
it's your feelings.
Your first feelings on waking.
Your first feelings on waking
are instant guidance to the general quality of the dream,
whether it's literal or sybolic,
whether it's urgent, big or small.
And one of the other questions is the reality check question
"What do you recognize from this dream
in the rest of your life, and,
could any of this happen in the future
literally or symbolically.
Dreams are orienting us to the future,
we don't want to miss that.
Step three is when you're talking about a dream
you learn to say to each other,
"If it were my dream," or
"If it were my life, this is what I'd think about."
We do not tell people what their dreams or lives mean.
We offer a suggestion from our point of view,
which enforces the idea that the dreamer
is the authority on her own dreams,
dreams belong to the dreamer,
not to some tenured claricy of professionals.
Dreams belong to the dreamers.
And finally we want action.
You've dreamed of something
okay go research that funny word,
go wear the color red.
Go deal with your ex who keeps turning up in your dream.
Burn the wedding dress or be ready for somone
who will present the same challenges in your life
as your ex.
But take action.
Action, action.
In the workshops of course, taking action can be
turning the dream into performance, theater,
expressive art, all sorts of things
to move the energy and not just leave it sort of
as a set of chatter.
So to incorporate dream time
information as significant, credible data,
that is there to guide us or inform us,
rather than relegating it to,
"Oh, well it's just a dream."
Because that's the big one,
it's a credibility factor, certainly in the United States.
Oh right, you dreamt something again.
Uh-huh. Well you know, we have to do better.
We have to learn to check out our dreams,
your big dreams and little dreams.
I mean in Hawaiian there's a whole vocabulary
for dreaming in Hawaiian.
You might have a straight up dream,
which means a clear dream,
a literal dream that is showing you something
in ordinary reality that is happening at a distance
or will happen in the future.
Or you might, in the Hawaiian language
have a wild goat fish dream,
they eat goat fish in Hawaii.
A wild goat fish dream is the result of
eating the wrong food, in the wrong way,
in the wrong season.
And it's a trash dream, you throw it away,
don't pay attention to that.
So we want to be discerning about dreams.
I mean dreams are not equal,
there are dreams that are commentaries
on how we ate last night.
There are dreams that are fairly routine processing,
but basically every dream is worth a look.
Every dream is worth asking a few questions about.
And sometimes it's the mundane, trivial seeming dreams
that contain the most practical guidance
on ordinary life,
because ordinary life can be mundane.
And sometimes there's sort of office dreams
and you'd rather be having some epic adventure,
flying on the back of dragons
to some paradisaical scene.
Sometimes those routine office dreams
contain clues to how to handle yourself
in regular situations and can be very helpful.
So you don't want to throw out any dream material
until you've had a look at it.
Right.
There are times I've noticed,
where we have repetitive dreams
that happen over a long period of time.
That kind of dream.
And in my own case I had a dream that lasted
from the age of three, the most recent one was
just very recently.
Although they stopped for about a decade,
but it was a progression of mastery in the dream
in this particular task where as I matured and aged
I was more and more proficient,
and then defied odds, defied gravity and all these things
and moved through.
But it was ...
Would you say that that was simply a reflection
of where you are or an encouragement
to continue on, when we have these progressive dreams
of the same theme over a lifetime?
Well it sounds like a series of magic mirrors,
this particular dream, showing a progression in life,
providing encouragement to continue that progression,
and showing, as if the dream producers are holding up
a mirror saying, this is where you are at this point,
here you are now.
Not simply a reflection of the waking self,
but encouragement and support from a deeper reality
for what the waking self is endeavoring to do.
You know, recurring dreams, repetitive dreams,
evolving dreams, serial dreams over time
can unfold in various ways and can have different contexts.
It's by observing the serial dream,
the repetitive dream scenes that are evolving over time
that we learn about parallel realities,
on the human level for example.
The common wisdom of physics today
is that we may live in one of maybe infinite
parallel universes.
How do you understand that on a human experiential level?
Pay attention to dreams in which you are carrying on
a pathway in your dreams
and things are evolving,
things are going along across time,
but it's not exactly the ordinary reality you are in.
So this is a very interesting way of
checking out for yourself,
from your own information, from your own data,
the possibility that you are living in one of
several parallel universes.
I think that's true a fair amount
in my own dreamscape because oftentimes
I'm in a world that is maybe another dimension
or aspect of earth, it's not scaled the same,
the animals are different, they're hybridized.
It's different, it's larger.
And this is the most common place I find for dreamscape
is in this other world entirely, it doesn't ...
Large groups of people helping,
moving people around from place to place.
Yes.
See this is one of the things we need to understand
about the nature of dreaming,
the fields of dreaming,
I mean dreams can be symbolic
and that's where psychologically trained minds go first,
what does this symbol mean?
And that' where the drugstore dream dictionary mind
goes first, look it up.
What does water mean, what does a parrot mean.
And it's different to each person,
is it not?
Different to each person.
So there are symbolic dreams and they're
very important and interesting,
and then there are literal dreams,
or straight-up dreams to quote the Hawaiians,
which are very much about what is happening in this world
and what will happen in the future.
And maybe psychic dreams in the sense that you are
seeing quite clearly things that are distant from you.
And then there are the dreams that are the experiences
of a separate reality all together.
And these, for active dreamers, are the most interesting.
You've given some examples from your own life.
We dream of other times and other lifetimes too,
and from this we may or may not evolve some theory
about our relationship with past or future lives.
I dreamed all my life, for example, of a life which,
a parallel Robert, not in his present body,
is living in Britain and in Europe during World War II.
I've dreamed this all of my life,
I've dreamed it since my childhood.
Now could that be a parallel or past?
Well, you know, the thing about dreaming
is you step out time.
So you can say, "Okay, this is the 1930s."
"Which year is it?"
"This is 1941 in occupied Europe."
Is that about what's happening then
or is it about something happening now
from a point of view that transcends linear clock time?
I don't know.
I know it's relevant to me,
and I know that in my own sense of my life story
the fact that I am dreaming recurringly, again and again
in shifting scenes of adventures in Europe
and in Britain in the 30s and during World War II,
is absolutely fundamental to my understanding
of everything.
Yes, that is your alternate reality.
Your other ...
It's one of the alternate realities.
I also dream of ...
I mean, I became my first job was as a lecturer
in ancient history at the Australia National University.
The reason that I was drawn to that and offered
that job was that as a child I used to dream in Greek.
I'd keep a Greek dictionary by my bedside.
I'm a lazy linguist.
I'm a lazy linguist
But I was given difficult words in Greek
that I had to study.
So we have different styles of dreaming.
One of my patterns of dreaming is I dream
into different cultures into different times.
And it gives me specific leads that I am able to follow up.
I mean, I'm a historian, I've been a journalist,
I know how to do hard research, I like to check sources,
I don't like fluffy new-age thinking about these things.
So I check these things out.
So in my dreams I am often given specific details,
strange words, strange details,
places, dates, et cetera, which I can check out.
And I've developed this central practice
I call dream archaeology.
You're given some clues to a different culture,
a different place, you can check them out.
You bring the best of scholarship and science
to bear on it and then you have something
really interesting.
Recently, for example, I've been teaching in the Baltic.
I'm very excited by this, I was just in Latvia and Estonia.
I've been to Lithuania three times.
These are countries that have been through
one of the most grueling nightmares of history
that we know about,
the Germans on one side and the Russians on the other.
Trodden on by everybody, brutalized by everybody.
Going to these countries to bring back the dreaming
is an act of cultural soul recovery.
Let me ask you a question,
when you have a people that have been so traumatized,
and repressed and as you say, from each direction,
do they often start losing their dream memory?
Or are their dreams seriously impacted
by these experiences collectively?
I think that there was an effort to destroy
the imagination, I mean to destroy the collective mind
and spirit of these peoples.
I mean the sheer loss of population,
the forced deportations, the mass murders of the population
the effort to corrupt and distort the imagination,
had a terrible effect.
But bringing back the dreaming,
and bringing back some ancestral traditions
that transcend and precede all that horror
is an act of healing.
And I've found people flocking to my workshops
to learn how to dream again
and to learn how to share things with each other.
Different phenomena in different parts of the region.
In one of the countries people were very shy
about saying too much in front of others
because although they've been independent
for 20 years now, it's only 20 years.
And they all remember in their families,
a time when it was terribly dangerous to say anything
that you held true in the presence of others
under totalitarian dictatorship.
So I'm finding that a very interesting thing.
And one of the things that's going on there
is that we, in these workshops in the Baltic,
including I, myself, are dreaming of authentic sources
on the ancient traditions of these countries.
When I first went to Lithuania
I led a group journey for ancestral knowledge.
I found myself talking to an ancestral priestess of Zemyna
the great earth goddess of Lithuania,
who insisted on speaking to me in ancient Lithuanian.
Showed me some techniques of healing and divination
which I have, was able to check out with the group
and we found ourselves engaged in restoring
authentic sources, goddess sources,
of the old goddess tradition of the Baltic.
Which had not died completely,
Marija Gimbutas's work is an illustration of that,
that it didn't die completely but has been buried
and repressed.
So you know, dreaming is a key to all these things.
It's a key to soul.
It's in our individual lives,
it's a key to finding where our vital energy
or identity might have gone because of trauma,
pain, abuse, addiction,
in our lives when we lost a part of ourselves,
we lost that beautiful teenager
or that young child went missing.
Dreaming will show us how to get back
more of ourselves and it will show us as communities
how to bring back soul and heart and spirit
to collective groups as well.
And that's something that's needed globally.
It's needed everywhere.
The globe is being stressed
from every front right now.
It's needed everywhere.
One of the functions of dreamers in traditional
societies is to communicate,
not just with their personal subconscious,
and not just with each other,
although dreaming is a social activity,
we meet other people, we want to do that,
but to dream with the animate spirits of the earth.
To dream with earth and sea, and mountain and tree,
and animal.
And if we're liking that, we're liking a dimension
of our humanity and our ability
to survive and prosper on this planet
and to maintain the balance.
So dreaming is as important as that.
We need speakers for the trees,
we need speakers for the ocean.
Not just environmental warriors,
we need them too,
but people who are actually, directly in contact
with the animate forces and intelligences of the earth.
This is one of the things that dreamers can provide.
Beautiful.
And while we're talking about all of this,
if you run into most people in the street
and ask, "What was your dream last night?"
"Oh, I don't remember my dreams."
And a part of that is because of the shock
of a culture in which work is put above everything else
and we shock ourselves awake in the morning,
slam down the first cup of tea or coffee
and go on about it.
Because we don't value the dreams,
we haven't instructed ourselves to bring our dreams to us.
We have this kind of mass amnesia about our dreams.
So you have ways in which to help people
retrieve dreams and I love it.
One of the chapters, The Place of Lost and Found Dreams,
(laughs) let's talk about that a little bit.
It started for me one morning when I didn't remember
any of my own dreams.
I thought, "This is no good.
"Robert the great dreamer, where are your dreams?"
So I decided to see what I could do about that
and I found myself going to a place
like the greatest video store you could possibly imagine.
It's a wide awake dream.
I'm lying in bed and I'm finding myself
crossing the threshold, which is like a flowerbed
that is also a doormat to this fantastic sort of
cosmic video store,
where I'm received by this attendent.
And I'm shown file upon file, rank upon rank
of DVDs from categories, you know,
family, adult, drama, thriller,
and categories we don't have in ordinary video stores.
All my dreams.
And I find in the waking dream I can select a DVD
and play it and then it's a sense around movie
and I enter it, et cetera.
And I notice in this cosmic video store,
the whole section devoted to my dreams
with other people, dreams I've shared with friends,
adventures I've had with other people.
so this is one of the locations I've discovered
we could learn to go to to look for our lost dreams
another version would be the cinema of lost dreams,
or the post office of lost dreams
where you pick up the mail that you haven't been collecting.
So in some of the workshops, and in the book,
I suggest you can do this at home.
I encourage people to go to a space
where they can pick up some of the dream messages
that they've been losing.
I think that's an excellent idea
and I think one of the problems or challenges
that certainly more Western cultures likely have
wherever you have a dominance of logic
and left-brain thinking,
is this question as to,
"Oh but what if I'm just making up everything."
When you talk about taking this information
and taking action on it,
the question arises,
"What if I'm just making it all up?"
But I love making it up.
I mean we have a song we sing in the workshops,
"Make it up as you go along,
"The way will show the way."
I mean, children understand this,
the magic of making things up.
It's about bringing back the art of imagination.
Real shamans are masters of imagination
and suggestion.
Rabindranath Tagore said, with a poet's clarity,
he said the stronger the imagination,
the less imaginary the results.
So a lot of this is about learning to make it up.
It's a story from history in active dreaming
which you may recognize,
as it involves a famous Viennese psychiatrist called
Victor Frankel.
Yes, it's a beautiful story.
He was in Auschwitz during World War II.
He's reduced to a skeleton with a tattoo on his arm,
there's no possibility of any hope,
he can be killed at any moment.
His world smells of blood and excrement.
And he decides in the situation to grow a vision in his mind
an impossible vision, to make something up.
He makes up in his imagination,
a vision of a world in which the Nazis are past history.
In which he is comfortably, comfortably well-fed
and well-dressed in a pleasant auditorium
with well-upholstered seats,
giving a lecture on the psychology
of the concentration camps.
Not only has he survived,
but as a psychiatrist, an original mind,
he is making sense and philosophy
out of the horror that he survived.
He says that that active imagination got him through.
When I feel sorry for myself
or I see other people feeling sorry for themselves,
I think about that and I think about what it can be
to make up a vision of possibility that wants
to take root in your world.
So I'm in favor of making things up.
One of the things that I do is I teach people
the practice of imagination.
When you're in the process of doing this
and dealing with people, as you say,
from war-torn, damaged regions
such as where you recently were along the Baltic,
to American cities, European cities,
what is the greatest barrier for people
giving themselves permission to simply daydream
and make things up and use their imagination?
Why is there something attached to that?
A fear almost attached to it in a lot of people.
The greatest barrier is actually an absence.
It's the absence of the child inside you.
Because the child inside you knows about
the magic of making things up,
has all the imagination you can every need,
is the master of dreams and imagination.
One of the early chapters in Active Dreaming,
I quote my youngest daughter when she was four years-old.
She came to me and she said,
"You know, daddy, I go to a special place
called Teddy Bear Land."
"Yes, I've heard about that."
"Do you want to know how I go there?" She says.
She's four years old.
"Sure."
She says, "Sometimes I take the Sun Gate,
sometimes I take the Moon Gate.
Sometimes I take the Rainbow Bridge
and sometimes I just punch a hole in the world."
"I punch a hole in the world."
That's the natural shamanism of a child.
That's not because she's my daughter,
that's the natural shamanism of a young child.
So if we have difficulty exercising imagination,
if we have difficulty giving ourselves
permission to think outside the boxes,
it's because we have allowed ourselves to become estranged
from the child of wonder, the wunderkind,
the child of wonder inside ourselves.
And one of the essential things I do
is I help as to bring that child back
Sometimes it involves reaching beyond what is within us,
to finding the child who has been exiled some
and a realm of lost boys and girls
through what shamans call soul loss,
and finding that child of wonder
and bringing it back and putting it in the heart.
I was recently in France and there was a woman there,
a residential workshop,
she said on close of the first day,
"Robert, I don't know what I'm doing here
"I don't dream, I haven't remembered a dream
"since I was seven years-old."
She was 37.
No dreams for 30 years.
I said, "Okay, tell me the last dream."
She says, "In my last dream, when I was seven,
"A hand is reaching from behind a curtain,
"it's offering me chocolate, and I like chocolate.
"But I'm scared because it's a disembodied arm
"and I can't see who's offering the chocolate.
"I wake up screaming.
"My parents say 'Go back to sleep it's just a dream.'
"And I pray," she says,
"for no more dreams.
"I don't want any dreams, I'm so terrified.
"No more dreams."
Her prayer was answered.
For 30 years she's remembered no dreams.
So I say to her, "Okay, good.
"How would you like to go back inside?
"Consciously, go back inside the last dream you remember.
"Open the curtain and see what's behind it?"
"Oh," she's a little bit nervous.
But she agrees to do it.
Now it's a workshop, we're using shamanic drumming,
shifting consciousness with the aid of this
primal effective technology.
And she's given support.
She's invited two people to come as her friends,
into her dreamspace
to help her open the curtain and be bodyguards
if necessary.
So here she is, 30 years on,
opening the curtain in a conscious dream,
a lucid, wide awake dream adventure,
and behind the curtain she finds
a being that is almost angelic in it's beauty.
And she recognizes him eventually as a man
she loved when she was a small girl.
He was her father's best friend.
He'd been killed in an accident shortly before the dream.
And she says, "Why couldn't I see your face?"
He said, "My face was horribly mutilated,
"I didn't want to frighten you
"so I held myself secret behind the curtain
"while giving you a gift."
That night, and this is so beautiful
and there are tears flowing and it's lovely,
and that night, she dreams up a storm.
At the breakfast table she says
"My dreams went through the night like a high speed train,
a train grande vitesse, vroom, vroom, vroom."
At the breakfast table she tells us eight dreams
from one night.
The woman who's remembered no dreams
for 30 years because she went back into an old dream
and in the process she got back in touch
with her child self.
And the child self was now helping her to
deliver all the dreams and all the soul energy
that was missing.
Ah, that's a beautiful story.
This is the kind of thing that I do,
and this is why I do it.
Sometimes people will ask me,
"Robert, why do you travel so much?
"Why do you work all the time at these workshops?"
I say "It's because I love to see the light of spirit
"come on in people's eyes when their dream
"and their soul has come back to them."
Well, let's talk about,
just for a moment here,
another kind of dream entirely,
which might be a collective,
it might be an awareness that needs to surface,
it might be a warning.
I wrote a blog about this recently
that received quite a few responses.
And I put it out there,
I normally do not share my dreams or anything,
personal things in blogs, per se,
but in this one I felt it was necessary.
And sure enough, within an hour or two
the comments started,
"Oh yes, I've seen the same thing in my dream.
"I've seen this, my daughter's seen the same thing."
And the reason I had originally brought it up
is because a friend who psychically I'm very, very close to
and I, had the same dream at the same time.
And that dream mutated into the same thing
at the same time.
I'm hovering, waiting to hear what the dream is.
Oh, it was actually ...
My version of it was in the dream time,
a large black helicopter,
one of the military types that are called black helicopters,
flew overhead, they're unmarked.
I've seen them in real life before.
Came overhead and was hovering
and suddenly turned into a cubical type of craft
that started spinning on it's side
it was very mesmerizing for myself and the others
standing on the ground.
Next thing that happened is this cubicle type,
almost a fence,
it was an odd grid-like thing,
I realized "Oh goodness, that's a UFO."
It showed itself as a black helicopter,
it morphed and it's a UFO.
Next thing I knew there wa a lapse of time,
it came down around all of us
and we were inside the same structure
but it looked like a fence.
And I said, "We're not in a fence,
"this is a UFO."
My friend was having the same dream
but she was fighting the feeling.
She had no lapsing time.
She was fighting the feeling that was happening
because in the dream she was starting to go into this
hypnotic state as this thing morphed into a UFO
and the lights started flashing and strobing.
So we were having different views of the same dream
at the same time, the same morning.
I told Scott about it when I woke up
and then Linda, who was staying with us woke up
and said, "I have to tell you my dream,
there was a black helicopter,"
I said you don't have to tell me the rest,
I said, I understand.
So I wrote about it and all these people
started writing.
Well, we do have shared dreams, or collective dreams,
or interactive dreams,
which are not necessarily synonyms for each other.
We do dream into the same territory,
and we do dream into things that are important
for our kind overall.
Dreaming is social not just individual.
We do share experiences.
When it comes to UFOs or visitations
from another dimension,
we struggle for the right language to describe
what's going on.
I mean are we talking about interdimensionals,
are we talking about extraterrestrials,
or are they the same thing?
I mean I know from my own life as a dreamer
that right now we are sitting in a four-dimensional
universe which is part of a much vaster
multi-dimensional universe.
How does interaction between those who are at home
and the other dimensions,
and those who are at home in these four-dimensions
including time, take place,
maybe in the way that you perceive,
I've been dreaming recently,
and I've guided people inside a dream
in which we are beamed up
into space like an immense chamber of amber light.
I've been writing about this on my blogs.
It became very much alive when I was traveling
in the realm of Baltic Amber.
I was thinking that this space like an
egg-shaped amber chamber,
might look like a UFO to people
who think in terms of UFOs.
You saw it from the outside.
You might think of it as a UFO.
I don't think of it that way because I'm on the inside of it
and for me it seems like a space in which
people who are at home in a higher dimension,
a larger dimension, receive and train
and educate and interact with humans
who are capable of rising to that level.
But from a different point of view it might
look like a UFO.
Yes, and it wasn't particularly ...
I've had a lot of these where I'll,
something, a ball of light will come
and I'll have a transmission,
and I'm electrified and I have extra information.
And so it comes in a lot of different ways.
But what intrigued me was the symbolism,
the morphing, and the similarity between
a number of people.
Yes.
Yes, well we do have mass dreams.
We do have collective dreams.
And you know, when it comes to mass events,
events that will effect the species or the planet,
they seem to cast a shadow ahead of them.
Many people dream into them
before a hurricane, before a tsunami,
before 9/11.
When the information becomes available
you find that hundreds and possibly thousands,
and possibly hundreds of thousands of people
have been picking up something relevant
to that coming event.
Some with great specificity.
I mean one of my own dreamers,
on 9/11/2007, the dream that she,
with an A lead unit captured Osama Bin Ladin
in a compound surrounded by high walls,
topped by barbed wire or chicken wire.
It's a quite specific dream report.
She shared it in my presence on September the 11th 2007
and I have seen the journal report since.
So, I mean that's an example of someone
having apparently a precog hit,
four years ahead of time,
and actually seeing a situation
which it seems that US intelligence couldn't figure out.
As a dreamer.
As a dreamer with no particular interest in
international affairs.
Yes, those precognitive.
I've had those experiences too,
where a shuttle's ready to blow up
and you dream about it just in the wee hours
before and that kind of thing.
But there's something happening, it seems
that there's a group called the Arlington Institute,
and I don't know a lot about them,
I've just done a little research
and they have project called the Weather Map
and they have people send in their dreams
and they're starting to look at collective,
subconscious data that's emerging
from the dream world,
actually the military does the same thing for that matter
in gathering intelligence.
To use dream time to start reaching into
what we may be evolving toward
on any number of levels,
what do you think of that?
Well all of this, I'm not going to comment
on anybody's particular efforts,
I'm a person who's had a relationship
with the future in my dreams all my life,
they've saved my life.
I am convinced that I have avoided death
on the road three times by working with dreams
that showed me a possibly fatal situation.
I've worked with literally thousands
of precognitive dreamers.
To learn that not only do we see the future
in our dreams, but that they future we see
is a possible future,
and we can change the outcome if we can read the information
correctly and take action.
Whether by some sort of sampling of the sort of
the dream stream from thousands or millions
of people.
Whether you get information would be actually
of practical value to anybody, I don't know.
Yet I have said, that mass events cast a shadow
before them so it's possible that you would
get something out of it.
Probably the best information is going to come
from dreamers who are particularly good at what they do.
And we're valued in the history of our kind
because, you know, you look to the right dreamer
to show you, in an indigenous culture
where you got the food when you were starving.
Right.
There's an example of this which I wrote about
in My Secret History of Dreaming
from the Andaman Islands
during the Asian tsunami of 2004.
That tsunami killed 165,000 people
around the Indian Ocean.
And there's a group of people in the Andaman Islands
which claimed by the Indian government,
who, in December of 2004 were in their
coastal fishing settlements.
They hunter-gatherer fishing people.
They're also shamanic dreaming people, the Andamanese.
And after the tsunami, all their coastal fishing villages
had gone.
The Indian government assumed they'd all been
swept away by the giant wave.
Two weeks later, when an Indian chopper
was over flying the high country.
An Andamanese came out with a bow and arrow
and fired at the chopper saying go away,
we didn't need you then we don't need you now.
And they realized, the Andamanese had escaped
the tsunami because they knew it was coming.
They got out of the villages,
they went up to the high country
and they knew for two reasons.
This is very relevant to all of us,
Shamanic dreaming people,
they have a lesson for all of us.
Number one, they live close to nature.
They follow the patterns of wind and wave,
they follow the behavior of birds and animals
and they know things that way.
Secondly, they have a process of communal,
collective dreaming.
They get together in their big houses
to dream on, often survival matters.
Where do we find the fish?
Where do we find the food?
What is going to happen next?
They picture themselves growing a kind of web
of dreaming and they state their intentions
and as they enter the dreamspace,
they picture themselves going out across the web of dream
and dreaming then taking off one by one
and see what they need to see
and bringing back the results for their people.
I'm starting to teach processes
of conscious group dreaming of this kind
in which we've got a whole circle of people together,
we agree on our objective,
and we go out to dream together for a common purpose
in this way.
I think this is a skill we need to build in culture.
I was just going to ask you about that
as a follow up, absolutely.
So you're already,
you have this in the works now.
We're doing it.
You are?
I mean I'm doing it typically in groups
of 30 or 40 people in my workshops.
The results are extraordinary.
I mean I wrote about ...
There are guidelines for doing this in the new book,
in Active Dreaming.
I've written in more detail about specific experiences
of doing it in other books,
including one called Dreamers of the Iroquois.
Okay, well so, if you don't mind my asking,
if it's not invasive, since you have been dreaming,
not lucidly, consciously, your entire life,
or it sounds like your entire life,
and you have had your own glimpses into
the future, as you say, which can be changed.
If we understand the processes.
Can you talk a little bit about what you see?
What do you see for humanity?
What is the most important for me is actually
reflected in the last pages of the book
Active Dreaming which are a change of style
and a change of content,
they are documents from a possible future.
They are documents from a commonwealth
of dreamers, maybe seven generations beyond our time.
Which are supported by the world community
as a sort of Switzerland of the mind
because the values of dreaming are now considered
to be absolutely central to medicine, to education,
to seeing the future, to healing the planet.
In that future society as I have seen it,
I'm talking beyond the book now
there is a young woman who is a priestess
and scientist at the same time,
and a dreamer central to her practice is dreaming.
And she is one of an order of women who are trying to
repair this world,
and dreaming is absolutely central to their practice.
Around her is a world that is somewhat different
from ours.
Some bad things have happened.
Some further changes in human evolution
have taken place at a galloping rate,
which are going to be quite astonishing
in terms of what we can physically do.
I'm getting chills in my hair,
down to my toes as you speak.
We are actually becoming an amphibious people again.
The intent of our physical evolution.
This is accelerated by technology
as well as other things.
But the key thing is not the world context,
not the world disasters that have happened
between now and then.
It is that this woman is possible.
That dreaming as I understand it is central
to her practice and that of her order.
And in my own work,
I feel a huge obligation, responsibility
to make her possible.
That's one of the engines of my work.
On that note.
That beautiful note,
thank you so much for your time Robert.
I've very much been looking forward to meeting with you.
I understand the beauty and value, and possibility
of dreams myself even though I haven't fully explored them
and you've shed a great amount of light on it for us today.
It's a pleasure Regina,
and may your best dreams come true.
Thank you.
Sounds like it's time to pick up a dream journal.
Maybe one for nighttime and one for daytime.
I've found over my adult life that virtually
everything I've ever created in life
has first been daydreamed repeatedly.
And I can say, it works.
As for the nighttime,
we all need to be paying close attention
as our soul attempts to speak to us.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.